You have a chance to use that link in the resource guide.
You'll be able to download this sample contract created by Jessica Swartz.
She posted a blog on medium and so kindly shared it.
What I'd like to do is adapt somebody who is also willing to share their contract with us.
Adapt it to our own needs and I got to teach you how to do that with this one so we can customize it
and make it our own.
So we're not going to no longer going to need this top portion so let's go ahead and customize this.
We're going to go through this line by line and kind of talk about a little bit about contracts.
So this freelance contract the contract or the freelancers contract is entered in and made effective
on this date.
So all you do is fill out the date client name.
So this is going to be the big coffee company the big coffee ink with an office in location you can
always google that and find the main headquarters your location office okay.
And then we are the name.
So let's go and put our freelance company or personal name so we are the contractor we are the freelancer
right here.
And so this is kind of the basic ideas of if we sign this contract this is what we're agreeing to.
The client has a need for services and the freelancer has an interest in performing services for the
client.
So just like earlier there's something we're exchanging for a service for money or a service for something
in return.
The parties wish to set forth the terms and conditions upon which such services will be provided to
the client.
So we all agree to the following.
So this is where we're really going to have to create our own structure here.
So descriptions of the services of the freelancer will.
So I will be providing a one page illustration for an ad design and so we're just could I kind of write
that right now in a quick sentence or two OK.
So this is very brief but if you have a detail project maybe a web design project you might want to
be more descriptive of all the services you're going to provide if you're providing multiple service
make sure you have them and different lines so have service one service to make sure you list every
single service you're going to be providing that's going to be under this contract.
So the freelancer will provide a one page full color illustration for the use and a national marketing
campaign by the big Coffee Company Inc.
Okay so the deliverables will be what the client will receive from us.
So in this case it'll be a one page illustration.
But what files am I going to be sending to them.
This is where I need to make it really clear what they're going to get.
Are they going to get original files.
Are they going to get any physical illustrations or concepts or brainstorming kind of pages what exactly
are they paying for.
So this is going to be a one page illustration it's going to be in j peg format and also high resolution
formats.
I can list that as a PMG.
It depends on if it's going to be a vector illustration or not but you need to be as clear as possible
what the deliverables are.
So if that's ever a problem later on you can go back and say this is exactly the type of files that
you needed and there was no other extra files in there so project schedule is going to be the overall
timeline between you and the client of different project milestones.
For this example we have some initial sketches that we did do about five weeks after the contract is
signed.
So it wouldn't start until the contract was signed.
Five weeks to deliver my first item on the second item would be revisions so there would be two weeks
after I get feedback from those revisions.
So if I get feedback from those revisions those that two week timeline of me having to turn around and
give the next round of revisions starts.
So this protects both you and the client because it gives them deadlines for them to send you stuff.
And sometimes clients stall with sending items and if you have it in your contract you have to send
me this item before the next stage starts.
It kind of motivates them to get you the items they need.
And the other way around to it helps set deadlines for yourself.
And I find that having deadlines really helps me commit to a project.
This is where you'll spell it out.
You don't need to do it in big long paragraphs.
You could do it in short lines.
It could be as detailed as you want but I'd like to keep it very factual and just have dates and exactly
what they need to give me by that date.
And the other way around so pricing and rates this is where we obviously put what we're going to charge
for the project.
This is a very simple one project kind of thing.
So it's only going to be twenty one hundred dollars and it's USD.
I like to put U.S. dollars of it's going to be in U.S. dollars.
Make sure you put the currency so there's no conversion if you have a Canadian dollar.
Make sure you are very clear with your currency.
This is a legal document.
We have to be as clear and detailed as we can be.
So to any one hundred dollars for the completion of the project and you can build the scene as well
if you want to do anything that goes outside of the scope of the project or any additional projects
you could say forty two dollars per hour for any additional revisions outside of the scope of the illustration
or you can not you can just leave that open ended and then if anything goes beyond you can draw up another
contract for a different project and charge a fixed rate just really up to you to build that in there
if you want to.
I like to do it for projects like this because sometimes there's that little extra things they want
to do oh we want the illustration resized to another size and instead of having to go back and figure
out a fixed price quote I could just do per hour until I'm finished resizing the illustration.
So sometimes I like build that in there but you know if you think they want to add a whole lot more
in addition to that one illustration then I might even do a separate contract and another another fixed
rate.
So here we go.
So we don't need to talk about when payments are due.
Because that's what this next item is is payment terms and schedule.
So this is where we need to really think about how much they need to pay up front.
So this is going to be their deposit.
So this all by default is a 25 percent upfront deposit but a lot of times you'll see 50 percent as a
recommendation for freelancers.
What I'd like to do is it really depends.
I like to do a 50 percent deposit for new clients or clients that haven't proven proven themselves.
Sometimes I like to do with clients that don't have a lot of cash flow maybe have some new businesses
because the higher your deposit the more you're protected.
If the project fails or if the client cannot pay their money you have a non refundable 50 percent deposit
already.
So you're protected.
You get that 50 percent deposit.
You don't have to give it back it's non-refundable.
So it depends.
Sometimes a higher deposit level like a 50 or 75 percent can scare off some smaller clients larger clients
know the deal they understand that that's pretty standard for freelancers and contractors to have a
50 percent deposit.
Sometimes I'll have a 25 percent for those smaller new clients maybe I know them.
You know I don't want to intimidate them with such a high initial deposit so as long as you have one
and you get one that's all that matters.
You could do it anywhere from 25 to 75 percent upfront although 75 percent is a little high 50 percent
standard and 25 percent is if you're being nice and if you're being very lenient toward the client.
But I wouldn't do anything less than 25 percent because you know this is the money you get to keep if
something messes up.
So you want to make sure it's high enough to make it worthwhile if something goes wrong so I'm switching
it to a 50 percent upfront deposit because it's a large company.
They know the deal.
This is a very standard.
No they're not going to be intimidated by that so 50 percent upfront and spell out exactly how they
can pay.
Can they pay via pay pal.
Is that an option.
There is a two and a half or three percent fee every time a client pays with PayPal.
So sometimes you need to talk about that so maybe they have appear in the payment.
That's twenty one hundred dollars.
But if they pay with PayPal it'll be an additional 3 percent extra.
So you need to spell that out here in the payment terms.
If they pay by cheque or cash there's no extra fee.
If they pay by Pay Pal there's an extra 3 percent project charge for the transaction costs because you
don't want to take all those cost as you as as the freelancer you want to try to pass that onto the
client.
Sometimes the client might push back on that but you know that 3 percent adds up over time if you're
taking that transaction costs by using Pay Pal or another online transaction place.
You know those places aren't free.
So I like to take checks and cash from clients I really love checks because there's no transaction fees
and sending a check to me.
I could to keep 100 percent and I don't have to charge you a fee for it.
So for this case I got to do just payable by check.
They're a large company their marketing department can cut me a check and send it to my house.
No problem.
So this is some clauses I wanted to talk about either party has a right to terminate this agreement
at any point and feel free to modify these or add to them upon the termination of any project or work
given by the freelancer or the freelancer will immediately provide client with all or in any work in
progress or completed prior to the termination date.
So that means if I decide I have a lot going on and I can't complete the project I need to give them
all my sketches and everything I've done until that point because they did pay a deposit so they are
owed some level of work if I decide to quit early on.
So this is protect new client number two client so obligation to the freelancer resulting from termination
that client will pay the freelancer an equitable amount as determined by the client for partially completing
work in progress and the agreed to price for the completed services or deliverables.
So the second one protects you a little bit.
So this means that the client has to pay you something for the work that you send.
That's partially completed.
So that is protecting you the second one the third one upon termination or expiration of this contract
or the project performed by the freelancer whichever occurs first.
The freelancer so promptly return to client all materials and tools provided by the clients.
This protects the client if you they gave you software to use and you terminate the project.
You have to get back the software or any kind of physical things they needed for you to complete the
project that protects the clients you don't keep anything that's that's not yours.
When.
When the project was terminated and this also says the fee is nonrefundable we changed that to 50.
So let's make sure everything is consistent and this number up here matches the number down here so
that 50 percent fee is non-refundable.
I keep it no matter what.
So they need to understand that's part of the deal if I decide to terminate the project early.
I get to keep the fee that is part of what happens of course they can go back and sue you for that in
court and maybe have a case but that's only if you're the one who never completed any work.
I mean if you've completed some work and you still leave there's a little bit of leeway where you know
it all depends on this is this is law at all it's a very gray area it all depends on on the exact situation
but it's usually non-refundable so after a couple months we quit the project if you already completed
some things you're going to have to give them what you completed in exchange that you get to keep that
50 percent fee within reason why everything has to be within reason.